[Testing] Restructure/rewrite testing docs (#14731)
symfony/symfony-docs: testing.rst

    missing, you can try running the recipe again using
    ``composer recipes:install phpunit/phpunit --force -v``.

Types of Tests
--------------

There are many types of automated tests and precise definitions often
differ from project to project. In Symfony, the following definitions are
used. If you have learned something different, that is not necessarily
wrong, just different from what the Symfony documentation is using.

`Unit Tests`_
    These tests ensure that *individual* units of source code (e.g. a single
    class) behave as intended.

`Integration Tests`_
    These tests test a combination of classes and commonly interact with
    Symfony's service container. These tests do not yet cover the fully
    working application, those are called *Application tests*.

`Application Tests`_
    Application tests test the behavior of a complete application. They
    make HTTP requests (both real and simulated ones) and test that the
    response is as expected.

Unit Tests
----------

A `unit test`_ ensures that individual units of source code (e.g. a single
class or some specific method in some class) meet their design and behave

> as intended. Writing unit tests in a Symfony application no different from

Reviewer: `no different` -> `is no different

.. code-block:: terminal

    # run all tests of the application
    $ php ./vendor/bin/phpunit

    # run all tests in the Form/ directory
    $ php ./vendor/bin/phpunit tests/Form

    # run tests for the UserType class
    $ php ./vendor/bin/phpunit tests/Form/UserTypeTest.php

.. tip::

    In large test suites, it can make sense to create subdirectories for
    each type of tests (e.g. ``tests/Unit/`` and ``test/Functional/``).

.. _integration-tests:

Integration Tests
-----------------

An integration test will test a larger part of your application compared to
a unit test (e.g. a combination of services). Integration tests might want
to use the Symfony Kernel to fetch a service from the dependency injection
container.

Symfony provides a :class:`Symfony\\Bundle\\FrameworkBundle\\Test\\KernelTestCase`
class to help you creating and booting the kernel in your tests using
``bootKernel()``::

    // tests/Service/NewsletterGeneratorTest.php
    namespace App\Tests\Service;

    use Symfony\Bundle\FrameworkBundle\Test\KernelTestCase;

    class NewsletterGeneratorTest extends KernelTestCase
    {
        public function testSomething()
        {

>             // boot the Symfony kernel

Reviewer: I'm not sure this comment adds anything useful because the method name is completely self-explanatory.

            $product = new Product();
            $product->setName('Priceless widget');
            $product->setPrice(14.50);
            $product->setDescription('Ok, I guess it *does* have a price');
            $manager->persist($product);

            // add more products

            $manager->flush();
        }
    }

Empty the database and reload *all* the fixture classes with:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ php bin/console doctrine:fixtures:load

For more information, read the `DoctrineFixturesBundle documentation`_.

.. _functional-tests:

Application Tests
-----------------

Application tests check the integration of all the different layers of the
application (from the routing to the views). They are no different from
unit tests or integration tests as far as PHPUnit is concerned, but they
have a very specific workflow:

#. Make a request;
#. Click on a link or submit a form;
#. Test the response;
#. Rinse and repeat.

.. note::

    The tools used in this section can be installed via the ``symfony/test-pack``,
    use ``composer require symfony/test-pack`` if you haven't done so already.

Write Your First Application Test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Application tests are PHP files that typically live in the ``tests/Controller``

Reviewer: ```rst
``tests/Controller`` directory --> ``tests/Controller/`` directory
```

The PHPUnit Testing Framework
-----------------------------

Symfony integrates with an independent library called `PHPUnit`_ to give
you a rich testing framework. This article won't cover PHPUnit itself,
which has its own excellent `documentation`_.

Before creating your first test, install PHPUnit with the following
command:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require --dev phpunit/phpunit

After the library is installed, try running PHPUnit:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ php ./vendor/bin/phpunit

This commands automatically runs your application's tests. Each test is a
PHP class ending with "Test" (e.g. ``BlogControllerTest``) that lives in
the ``tests/`` directory of your application.

PHPUnit is configured by the ``phpunit.xml.dist`` file in the root of your
application.

.. note::

    :ref:`Symfony Flex <symfony-flex>` automatically creates
    ``phpunit.xml.dist`` and ``tests/bootstrap.php``. If these files are
    missing, you can try running the recipe again using

>     ``composer recipes:install phpunit/phpunit --force -v``.

Reviewer 2: 👍

Types of Tests
--------------

There are many types of automated tests and precise definitions often
differ from project to project. In Symfony, the following definitions are
used. If you have learned something different, that is not necessarily
wrong, just different from what the Symfony documentation is using.

`Unit Tests`_
    These tests ensure that *individual* units of source code (e.g. a single
    class) behave as intended.

`Integration Tests`_
    These tests test a combination of classes and commonly interact with
    Symfony's service container. These tests do not yet cover the fully
    working application, those are called *Application tests*.

`Application Tests`_
    Application tests test the behavior of a complete application. They

>     make, sometimes fake, HTTP requests and test that the response is as

Reviewer 2: "Faked" requests is super confusing as a new user. Lets put it in quotation marks to show that this is a concept. 

```suggestion
    make HTTP requests (both real and "faked") and test that the response is as
```

Author: :+1: also used "simulated" instead of "faked" :)

Reviewer 2: Good. That is a better word.

    expected.

Unit Tests
----------

A `unit test`_ ensures that individual units of source code (e.g. a single
class or some specific method in some class) meet their design and behave
as intended. Writing unit tests in a Symfony application no different from
writing standard PHPUnit unit tests. You can learn about it in the PHPUnit
documentation: `Writing Tests for PHPUnit`_.

By convention, the ``tests/`` directory should replicate the directory
of your application for unit tests. So, if you're testing a class in the

> ``src/Util/`` directory, put the test in the ``tests/Util/`` directory.

Reviewer 3: Could we find another name than `Util` for this directory? Such meaningless names are usually considered a bad practice: https://dave.cheney.net/2019/01/08/avoid-package-names-like-base-util-or-common

Autoloading is automatically enabled via the ``vendor/autoload.php`` file
(as configured by default in the ``phpunit.xml.dist`` file).

You can run tests using the ``./vendor/bin/phpunit`` command:

.. code-block:: terminal

    # run all tests of the application
    $ php ./vendor/bin/phpunit

    # run all tests in the Util/ directory
    $ php ./vendor/bin/phpunit tests/Util

    # run tests for the Calculator class
    $ php ./vendor/bin/phpunit tests/Util/CalculatorTest.php

.. tip::

    In large test suites, it can make sense to create subdirectories for

>     each type of tests (e.g. ``tests/unit/`` and ``test/functional/``). In

Reviewer 4: Minor thing but should we perhaps show `tests/Unit/` and `test/Functional` so the namespaces of your test classes have consistent casing? `namespace App\Tests\Unit;` vs `namespace App\Tests\unit;`

    this case, it is recommended that each subdirectory replicates the

>     application directory structure.

Reviewer 2: Hm.. Im not sure if we should mention this. Sure it is valid, but it has little real benefit. If you are using PHPUnit test suites, then this has zero benefits.

Author: I've slightly reworded this note. I think it's good to tell people that this is not a mandatory structure (and also show a common different structure).

        # config/packages/test/twig.yaml
        twig:
            strict_variables: true

    .. code-block:: xml

        <!-- config/packages/test/twig.xml -->
        <?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
        <container xmlns="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services"
            xmlns:xsi="http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema-instance"
            xmlns:twig="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/twig"
            xsi:schemaLocation="http://symfony.com/schema/dic/services
                https://symfony.com/schema/dic/services/services-1.0.xsd
                http://symfony.com/schema/dic/twig
                https://symfony.com/schema/dic/twig/twig-1.0.xsd">

            <framework:config strict-variables="true"/>
        </container>

    .. code-block:: php

        // config/packages/test/twig.php
        $container->loadFromExtension('twig', [
            'strict_variables' => true,
        ]);

You can also use a different environment entirely, or override the default
debug mode (``true``) by passing each as options to the ``bootKernel()``
method::

    self::bootKernel([
        'environment' => 'my_test_env',
        'debug'       => false,
    ]);

.. tip::

>     It is recommended to run your test with ``debug`` set to ``false`` on

Reviewer 4: If you still have the `var/cache/test` from a previous run, this will be an issue. I add the following to my `tests/bootstrap.php` to ensure the cache is cleared before each run:

```php
// tests/bootstrap.php

if (false === (bool) $_SERVER['APP_DEBUG']) {
    // Ensure a fresh cache when debug mode is disabled.
    (new \Symfony\Component\Filesystem\Filesystem())->remove(__DIR__.'/../var/cache/test');
}
```

I know we are not mentioning paratest in this PR but there is an additional consideration to make here when using it:

```php
// tests/bootstrap.php

if (false === (bool) $_SERVER['APP_DEBUG'] && null === ($_SERVER['TEST_TOKEN'] ?? null)) {
    /*
     * Ensure a fresh cache when debug mode is disabled. When using paratest, this
     * file (tests/bootstrap.php) is required once at the very beginning, and once per process.
     * Checking that TEST_TOKEN is not set ensures this is only run once at the beginning.
     */
    (new \Symfony\Component\Filesystem\Filesystem())->remove(__DIR__.'/../var/cache/test');
}
```

Author: Nice suggestion, I've added your code example.

    your CI server, as it significantly improves test performance.

Customizing Environment Variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need to customize some environment variables for your tests (e.g. the
``DATABASE_URL`` used by Doctrine), you can do that by overriding anything you

> need in your ``.env.test`` file:

Reviewer 4: Environment variables can also be added to your `phpunit.xml`. When would you use `phpunit.xml` over `.env.test`? Is there a reason [these two env variables](https://github.com/symfony/recipes/blob/master/symfony/phpunit-bridge/5.3/phpunit.xml.dist#L14-L15) can't be added to `.env.test`?

Author: I'm not sure, I think they can be part of `.env.test`. @nicolas-grekas do you maybe know why they aren't?

.. code-block:: text

    # .env.test

    # ...
    DATABASE_URL="mysql://db_user:db_password@127.0.0.1:3306/db_name_test?serverVersion=5.7"

In the test environment, these env files are read (if vars are duplicated
in them, files lower in the list override previous items):

#. ``.env``: containing env vars with application defaults;
#. ``.env.test``: overriding/setting specific test values or vars;
#. ``.env.test.local``: overriding settings specific for this machine.

.. caution::

>     The ``.env.local`` file is **not** used in production, to make each

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    The ``.env.local`` file is **not** used in the test environment, to make each
```

Reviewer 2: This change is marked as "resolved".  I think it was a typo, shouldn't this be corrected?

    test set-up as consistent as possible.

Retrieving Services in the Test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In your integration tests, you often need to fetch the service from the
service container to call a specific method. After booting the kernel,
the container is stored in ``self::$container``::

    // tests/Service/NewsletterGeneratorTest.php
    namespace App\Tests\Service;

    use App\Service\NewsletterGenerator;
    use Symfony\Bundle\FrameworkBundle\Test\KernelTestCase;

    class NewsletterGeneratorTest extends KernelTestCase
    {
        public function testSomething()
        {

>             // boot the Symfony kernel

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
            // (1) boot the Symfony kernel
```

for consistency

file instead and commit it to the shared repository. Learn more about
:ref:`using multiple .env files in Symfony applications <configuration-multiple-env-files>`.

After that, you can create the test database and all tables using:

.. code-block:: terminal

    # create the test database
    $ php bin/console --env=test doctrine:database:create

    # create the tables/columns in the test database
    $ php bin/console --env=test doctrine:schema:create

.. tip::

    A common practice is to append the ``_test`` suffix to the original
    database names in tests. If the database name in production is called
    ``project_acme`` the name of the testing database could be
    ``project_acme_test``.

Resetting the Database Automatically Before each Test
.....................................................

Tests should be independent from each other to avoid side effects. For
example, if some test modifies the database (by adding or removing an
entity) it could change the results of other tests.

The `DAMADoctrineTestBundle`_ uses Doctrine transactions to let each test
interact with an unmodified database. Install it using:

.. code-block:: terminal

>     $ composer require --dev dama/doctrine-test-bundle

Reviewer 3: Shouldn't we add this package to `test-pack` then?

Reviewer 4: I've been trying to recommend `dama/doctrine-test-bundle` as a _performance_ tool rather than a _reset_ tool. Transactions can be daunting to newcomers and can make debugging a failing test difficult (the data isn't in your test database after a test fails).

I _think_ the plan is to add `zenstruck/foundry` to the `test-pack` and recommend using it's `ResetDatabase` trait (which doesn't, by default, rely on transactions to reset).

_(this comment is a response to https://github.com/symfony/symfony-docs/pull/14731#discussion_r590235802)_

Author: I agree. However, as we know, there is no official reset tool for Doctrine, nor is there a library that only does the reset logic. So we'll have to wait for Foundry to be documented in this article before we can recommend the `ResetDatabase` trait for resetting and only use the dama bundle for performance.

Also, this PR targets 4.4 (to avoid merge conflicts for the next years). We'll probably only want to talk about Foundry in the 5.3+ version of the docs.

Now, enable it as a PHPUnit extension:

.. code-block:: xml

    <!-- phpunit.xml.dist -->
    <phpunit>
        <!-- ... -->

        <extensions>
            <extension class="DAMA\DoctrineTestBundle\PHPUnit\PHPUnitExtension"/>
        </extensions>
    </phpunit>

> That's it! This bundle uses a clever trick: it begins a database

Reviewer 3: It will probably break tests using Panther. Can this be disabled on a per-test basis?

Reviewer 4: I don't believe so.

Reviewer 6: > Can this be disabled on a per-test basis?

Theoretically its possible. But this would defeat the purpose a bit since then some tests will actually persist changes in the DB and potentially impact other tests.

In this case I think one should split the tests into different suites and only enable `dama/doctrine-test-bundle` for non-Panther tests maybe.

    Use the ``--coverage-*`` command options to generate code coverage reports.
    Read the PHPUnit manual to learn more about `code coverage analysis`_.

Types of Tests
--------------

> `Unit Tests`_

Reviewer 2: I really like that we define these types of tests. But since many definitions already exist, I suggest that we add a disclaimer with the following principle: 

"This is how we define the test type in the documentation, It is just because we need to know what we are referring to. You may have learnt something else, that is not necessarily wrong".

    These tests ensure that *individual* units of source code (e.g. a single
    class) behave as intended.

`Integration Tests`_
    These tests test a combination of classes and commonly interact with
    Symfony's service container. These tests do not yet cover the full
    working application, those are called *Functional tests*.

`Functional Tests`_
    Functional tests test the behavior of a complete application. They
    make HTTP requests and test that the response is as expected.

`End to End Tests (E2E)`_
    At last, end to end tests test the application as a real user. They use
    a real browser and real integrations with external services.

Unit Tests
----------

A `unit test`_ ensures that individual units of source code (e.g. a single
class or some specific method in some class) meet their design and behave
as intended. Writing Symfony unit tests is no different from writing
standard PHPUnit unit tests. You can learn about it in the PHPUnit
documentation: `Writing Tests for PHPUnit`_.

By convention, the ``tests/`` directory should replicate the directory
of your application for unit tests. So, if you're testing a class in the

> ``src/Util/`` directory, put the test in the ``tests/Util/`` directory.

Reviewer 4: With the 4 test types officially defined, should we suggest an alternate `tests/` directory structure?
- `tests/Unit/`
- `tests/Integration/`
- `tests/Functional/`
- `tests/E2E/`

Reviewer 2: I know that we never discussed this. But I also use the structure defined by Kevin. 

The benefit is that you can easily run your slow E2E tests less often.

.. code-block:: terminal

    # run all tests of the application
    $ php bin/phpunit

    # run all tests in the Util/ directory
    $ php bin/phpunit tests/Util

    # run tests for the Calculator class
    $ php bin/phpunit tests/Util/CalculatorTest.php

Integration Tests
-----------------

TODO: KernelTestCase

Accessing the Container
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can get the same container used in the application, which only includes
the public services::

    public function testSomething()
    {
        $kernel = self::bootKernel();
        $container = $kernel->getContainer();
        $someService = $container->get('the-service-ID');

        // ...
    }

Symfony tests also have access to a special container that includes both the
public services and the non-removed :ref:`private services <container-public>`
services::

    public function testSomething()
    {
        // this call is needed; otherwise the container will be empty
        self::bootKernel();

        $container = self::$container;
        // $someService = $container->get('the-service-ID');

        // ...
    }

.. TODO is this really different from self::$container and how to access

>    this in KernelTestCase?

Reviewer 2: Excellent question. What about `$kernel->getContainer()->get('test. service_container');`??

Having 3 different ways to get a container is confusing for me. 

Maybe @derrabus knows.

Reviewer 4: Isn't `self::$container` the same object as `$kernel->getContainer()->get('test.service_container');`

Author: Yes, and `self::$kernelContainer` is the same as `$kernel->getContainer()`.

However, we also have `$client->getContainer()`, which is defined in `KernelBrowser::getContainer()` as `$kernel->getContainer()`.

In this doc, we somehow make a difference between what's possible with `$client->getContainer()` vs `$kernel->getContainer()` and I'm unsure if they really are different?

* Test the response;
* Rinse and repeat.

Before creating your first test, install the ``symfony/test-pack`` which
requires multiple packages providing some of the utilities used in the
tests:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ composer require --dev symfony/test-pack

Set-up your Test Environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Client used by functional tests creates a Kernel that runs in a special
``test`` environment. Since Symfony loads the ``config/packages/test/*.yaml``
in the ``test`` environment, you can tweak any of your application's settings
specifically for testing.

> For example, by default, the Swift Mailer is configured to *not* actually

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should not mention Swift. It is being phased out. Right?

        ]);

You can also use a different environment entirely, or override the default
debug mode (``true``) by passing each as options to the ``createClient()``
method::

    $client = static::createClient([
        'environment' => 'my_test_env',
        'debug'       => false,
    ]);

.. tip::

    It is recommended to run your test with ``debug`` set to ``false`` on
    your CI server, as it significantly improves test performance.

Customizing Environment Variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you need to customize some environment variables for your tests (e.g. the
``DATABASE_URL`` used by Doctrine), you can do that by overriding anything you
need in your ``.env.test`` file:

.. code-block:: text

    # .env.test
    DATABASE_URL="mysql://db_user:db_password@127.0.0.1:3306/db_name_test?serverVersion=5.7"

    # use SQLITE
    # DATABASE_URL="sqlite:///%kernel.project_dir%/var/app.db"

This file is automatically read in the ``test`` environment: any keys here override
the defaults in ``.env``.

Configuring a Database for Tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Tests that interact with the database should use their own separate database to

> not mess with the databases used in the other :ref:`configuration environments <configuration-environments>`.

Reviewer 2: "mess" =)

Author: Yeah, original text, should be reworded :wink: (and also talk about the bad DX when using Docker + Symfony CLI + databases)

    // src/DataFixtures/ProductFixture.php
    namespace App\DataFixtures;

    use App\Entity\Product;
    use Doctrine\Bundle\FixturesBundle\Fixture;
    use Doctrine\Persistence\ObjectManager;

    class ProductFixture extends Fixture
    {
        public function load(ObjectManager $manager)
        {
            $product = new Product();
            $product->setName('Priceless widget');
            $product->setPrice(14.50);
            $product->setDescription('Ok, I guess it *does* have a price');
            $manager->persist($product);

            // add more products

            $manager->flush();
        }
    }

Empty the database and reload *all* the fixture classes with:

.. code-block:: terminal

    $ php bin/console doctrine:fixtures:load

For more information, read the `DoctrineFixturesBundle documentation`_.

Write Your First Functional Test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Functional tests are PHP files that typically live in the ``tests/Controller``
directory of your application. If you want to test the pages handled by your
``PostController`` class, start by creating a new ``PostControllerTest.php``
file that extends a special ``WebTestCase`` class.

> As an example, a test could look like this::

Reviewer 7: what about referencing `make:functional-test` and `make:unit-test` from the https://github.com/symfony/maker-bundle?

can be a good bootstraping code, like for fixtures above :)

Reviewer 3: For the record, these commands are now deprecated and a new `make:test` command has been introduced: https://github.com/symfony/maker-bundle/blob/main/src/Maker/MakeTest.php#L38-L42

IMHO the docs should be consistent with this command, and explain all `TestCase` types that are available.

Author: Yes, agreed. For now, I've updated the "Application Tests" section to use the new `make:test` command. Let's rework this thing in a follow-up PR.

        $client->submit($form, [], ['HTTP_ACCEPT_LANGUAGE' => 'es']);
        $client->submitForm($button, [], 'POST', ['HTTP_ACCEPT_LANGUAGE' => 'es']);

End to End Tests (E2E)
----------------------

> TODO

Reviewer 3: Could we also add a section about [`ApiTestCase`](https://api-platform.com/docs/distribution/testing/#testing-the-api) (or a link to this page)?

Author: Yes, let's do that in a follow-up PR :)
